INTRODUCTION TO COMMAND LINE TOOL FOR 
NETWORKING
NETWORK COMMANDS
The operating system consists of various built-in, command-line networking utilities 
that are used
for network troubleshooting.
1. Ping
2. Hostname
3.netstat
4. If Config
5. Nslookup
6. Traceroute
7.Route
8.IP Config

PING
PACKET INTERNET GROPER
Most widely used utility tool to troubleshootIt sends packets of information to the userdefined source. If the packets are received , thedestination device sends packets 
back.Ping can be used for two purposesNetwork connection can be established,Speed of 
the connectionPing is used to testing a network host capacity to interact with another 
host. Just enter the command.Ping, followed by the target host’s name or IP address.

HOSTNAME
Hostname :displays the machine hostname
Hostname –f :displays the fully qualified host and domain name
Hostname –I :displays the ip address for the current machine

netstat
Netstat command displays various network related information such as network
connections, routing tables, interface statistics, multicast memberships etc.
netstat -a : To show both listening and non-listening sockets
netstat -at : To list all tcp ports.
netstat -au : To list all udp ports.
netstat -l : To list only the listening ports.
netstat -lt : To list only the listening tcp ports
netstat -lu : To list only the listening udp ports.
netstat -lx : To list only the listening UNIX ports.
netstat -s : To list the statistics for all ports

If config
The if config commands is used for displaying current network configuration 
information ,setting up an ip address , netmask or broadcast address to an network 
interface , creatingan alias for network interface , setting up hardware address and 
enable or disable network interface
ifconfig –a :This option is used to display all the interfaces available, even if they are 
down.
ifconfig -s : Display a short list, instead of details
ifconfig interface up :This option is used to activate the driver for the given interface
ifconfig interface down :This option is used to deactivate the driver for the given 
interface.

Nslookup
Nslookup (stands for “Name Server Lookup”) is a useful command for getting 
informationfrom DNS server. It is a network administration tool for querying the 
Domain NameSystem (DNS) to obtain domain name or IP address mapping or any 
other specific DNSrecord. It is also used to troubleshoot DNS related problems.

Traceroute
Traceroute command prints the route that a packet takes to reach the host. This 
command is useful when we want to know about the route and about all the hops that a 
packet takes.

Route
Route command in Linux is used when you want to work with the IP/kernel routing 
table. It
is mainly used to set up static routes to specific hosts or networks via an interface. It is
used for showing or update the IP/kernel routing table.Install net-tools by $sudo apt-get 
install net-tools.
